Just a brief statement on how you became a professional writer, the background that led
you to it?
Well, it's everybody's story is a long story.
It's much easier for other people to summarize you than it is for you to summarize yourself.
I conceived in college the ambition to be a professional writer of fiction.
It was a number of years before I stumbled into writing fantasy.
And that was a crucial thing for me because my writing got a great deal better when I
started to write fantasy.
But that had been about eight years.
I had been writing as hard as I knew how for eight years before I started on fantasy.
And from the time I started writing fantasy until I finally achieved a publication of
some kind was another five years.
So, I had a 13 year apprenticeship in a sense and then it's been only since then that I've
been able to support myself as a writer.
Did you grow up reading science fiction and fantasy?
Well, actually no.
Not for any other reason than in terms of what I call a historical accident.
I was living in India because my parents were medical missionaries to India and we simply
got on a very erratic supply of books.
There was no one particular kind of thing that we got except mystery novels.
Missionaries love to read mystery novels.
I don't know quite why that is.
But other than that, it was a random sampling of everything.
I read Leon Urus and the Hardy Boys at the same time and I read Bomba the Jungle Boy
and I read James Mitchell and a whole range of things, whatever I could get my hands on.
Now, I loved every science fiction novel that I got my hands on, of which I can remember
every one.
There were three.
I read three by the time I was a high school graduate.
One was Alfred Bester's The Stars My Destination.
One was A.J.
Budri's Rogue Moon and one was Theodore Sturgeon's More Than Human.
Now, it's just an accident that I happened to get to read three classics in the only
three science fiction books I read.
They made a great impression on me but that was all there was.
Now, I came to the United States at the end of my high school days to start college and
I wanted to read more science fiction.
But I didn't know any people who read it so I didn't know any place to get information
about what was worth reading and what I would do was wander into a drug store and pick up
science fiction books.
And you can get some remarkably bad books doing that.
And the things that I picked up in the first couple of years in drug stores were so terrible
that I stopped reading science fiction.
And in fact, I didn't start reading science fiction again until I was finally in a position
where I knew people who could make recommendations that had to separate out the real garbage
from the good stuff.
Were the Chronicles of Thomas Covenant the first Chronicles?
Was that your first published work?
Yes.
Well, actually I had a couple of letters to the editor published in the Avengers comic
books back in the late 60s but that was the only other time my name was in print.
I heard you talk about this, I think it was yesterday.
You didn't have a lot of trouble getting that accepted.
I had a great deal of trouble getting my break.
Lord Files Bain was rejected by every fiction publisher in the United States and also by
all the magazines that did serializations at that time and also by several agents.
By the time I had finished having that book rejected, it had been rejected 47 times.
It took three and a half years or so for me to do that.
It was a very difficult process.
In a lot of ways I was saved by happenstance.
I went through the alphabet from A to Z with publishers and when I got to Z, I didn't know
what else to do.
I thought that it might work if I tried to send my book to British publishers.
I mean, I didn't have anywhere else to turn at that point.
So I sent away for a directory of British publishing so that I could begin going from
A to Z in England.
And while I was waiting for that book to come, I just couldn't bear to let my manuscript
sit.
So I resubmitted it to Valentine books.
And the only reason I did that was because they published Lord of the Rings, which meant
to me that they were a profitable company.
If they were making some money, they had at least a slightly better chance that they'd
take a wing on somebody like me.
What I did not know was that since the last time I had submitted my book to Valentine,
they had fired their entire editorial staff and had all new people.
And essentially what they had was Lester and Judy Lynn Delray.
And the Delray's jumped on Lord Fellsbane as soon as they got it.
They knew almost immediately that they wanted to publish this material.
It changed my life.
But up until then it was an extremely difficult process.
Okay, just one unfair question.
I'm sure it's too general to be a really fair one.
But was there a particular impetus behind that novel?
Well, that is pretty general.
I don't know what kind of impetus you're talking about.
When you started to write, was there something in your mind that said, I want to write a
novel of this type about Thomas Covenant, who's a leper and so forth?
Well, there's the key thing for me about the Chronicles of Thomas Covenant was that
my inspiration for it came from the end.
The first idea that occurred for me for that book was for the climax of the power that preserves.
Now, when I got a story going, I had an entire story ready to tell.
And from that point of view, the impetus that got me going on Lord Fellsbane was the climax
of the power that preserves.
And that has been my pattern in all the Covenant books is that I have worked them all backwards.
I mean, I don't write them backwards, but I plan them and arrange them backwards.
The thing that inspires me to write the story comes at the end.
So for the second Chronicles, it was the climax of White Goldweilder that convinced me that I wanted to write a second Chronicles.
And essentially my method is that I have this climactic scene in mind and I have to add it to the story.
And so the simple questions like who are these guys and how did they get into this mess?
And I plan backwards on that basis.
Well, in order for that to happen, these things must have happened first.
And if those things must have happened first, then these kinds of people must have been doing those kinds of things.
And I arrange everything backwards until I get to a point where I can start writing.
Which means that the one thing that's absolutely clear to me the whole time when I'm working on these things,
I know where I'm going.
I know exactly what the purpose of all these events is.
It's going to produce that result which you as a reader will finally come to at the end of 1500 pages or whatever.
And in the case of the first Chronicles, it was that climactic scene where Thomas Covenant, who has been rejecting the importance of his fantasy experience,
comes face to face with Lord Fowle.
And the fact that he disbelieves in some way in the reality of the fantasy gives him the emotional power to not be crushed by Lord Fowle.
He knows he doesn't need to be overwhelmed by evil because he denies its external reality.
He knows there's evil in him, but he doesn't have to be overwhelmed by this externalization of evil.
And that makes it possible for him to win.
Well, I knew that was where I was going the entire time I worked on the first trilogy.
I think in one of your glossaries at the end of one of the books, you had the land, you had it defined as a focal region of the earth.
Yeah.
You didn't have a particular spot or a where that the land is supposed to be located.
Well, I know it's on a globe.
You know, I mean, this is a world and the land is only, obviously, it's only a small continental portion of an entire world.
When you get into the second Chronicles of Thomas Covenant and people start voyaging around,
you at least get some sense that there are lots of other things going on in the world too.
My perception of it is that the land is kind of like the arena in which the crucial issues for the whole world are fought out.
And although they have amplifications and ramifications which affect events in other parts of the world
and different things happen maybe because of what's happening in the land,
but that everything focuses there.
Now, this is a subtle question in some ways and it's crucial in others.
In the one tree, the character is the Elohim who consider themselves to be very God-like, if not God itself.
One problem for them is that the crucial events are happening somewhere else.
They think, I mean, obviously, since we're crucial, if what's happening to you were really important, it would have been happening here instead of way over there.
And that leads them into some decisions of questionable ethics.
But for the thrust of the Covenant books as a whole, it is certainly true that the land is where the main battles are being fought.
And other stuff feeds into that but is not central.
A Covenant, at least in my experience with fantasy, I imagine for a lot of readers too,
a Covenant is sort of an anti-hero, you know, being a leper for one reason, but also being a, doesn't want to be a hero in the first place.
Why pick somebody that was not in the traditional?
Well, for one thing, you know, I mean, I wasn't aware of the tradition. I had read Lord of the Rings, but other than that, I hadn't read much fantasy myself.
So I wasn't making a conscious decision to go for or against anything normal.
I was just trying to deal with something that seemed to me to be exciting and appropriate.
Now, for me, the story started with the climax of the power that preserves.
I have an unbeliever confronting the evil principle and rising above it.
Well, I had that idea in my head for like three years before I ever had it.
Before I could figure out who those guys were and how they got into that mess.
That original idea, though it was very powerful to me, was also static. There was no story attached.
I got a story when it occurred to me that the person who is going to go from the real world to the fantasy world and reject the fantasy world in favor of the real world
should be somebody whose real world is unbearable and whose fantasy world is terrific.
I mean, look at it the other way around. Suppose you have a terrific real life and you have these rotten fantasies.
If you then say, I don't care about the fantasy, I'm going to stick with reality, what does that mean?
You know, I mean, you just, that's normal self-interest.
Anybody who has a terrible time in their nightmares and a wonderful time in the rest of their life is going to prefer the rest of their life.
It only becomes a moral statement when you have somebody who really hates their life because their life is terrible.
And their dreams are just wonderful and they still say, I'm going to reject the dream because I know the difference and even though reality is terrible,
I'm going to still affirm reality.
Now that may seem a little unbalanced or crazy to some people, but it is a moral statement of some kind because there's no self-interest in it.
It's not something that you do to make yourself feel better.
It's something that you do as an ideal or as a belief, a religious belief.
And of course, whose real life could be lousier than a leper's.
Now as soon as I thought of that, then I had a story.
I had a fantasy world because all I had to do was invent a fantasy world that is the direct opposite of being a leper.
And I had, you know, everything fell into place for me as soon as I thought of that kind of thing.
I never intended that as an anti-hero kind of situation.
From my point of view, the only thing that makes Covenant an anti-hero is that he doesn't want to be a hero.
He's afraid of being a hero.
But he is a hero from my point of view and I think most of my readers eventually get sucked into the point, even though they don't like him in the beginning.
First they start to admit that he's got some reasons for what he does and then they start grudgingly to respect what he's doing.
And before you know it, people end up liking him and identifying with him as if he were a normal hero.
And that's certainly the way it is for me.
I cared a lot about this character from the very beginning and I never worked with him as something that I would call anti-anything.
I knew he was having a tough time.
I know it was rotten to be in the position that he was in.
And I knew from various kinds of studies and research what sorts of psychological problems people who suffer from.
You know, what does it feel like to be despised by everybody around you for something that has nothing to do with what you did or didn't do?
You just got this disease.
You don't know why everybody hates you.
That exerts a tremendous psychological stress and it doesn't make people beautiful.
You don't become a nice guy just because you got leprosy.
The pressure brings any kind of pressure.
Brings out the flaws in human nature.
That's where you find out that there are areas where you're weak and areas where you're not very graceful.
It's when somebody puts a lot of pressure on you and you start to get a little nasty and you start to get a little impatient.
You start to do this and start to do that.
It seemed obvious to me, particularly at the beginning, that Copford is under tremendous psychological and emotional pressure.
And he's not going to be a very likable guy.
But what's going to happen, and of course I knew this all along,
what's going to happen is that in the course of Coppins with this dilemma,
he was going to essentially reintegrate his whole personality and become a constructive individual
who does know what he cares about and who does love other people and who is willing to fight for that.
So from my point of view, there was never any identification problem.
I identified with him a lot from the beginning.
For a reader, it's different.
A reader doesn't know where I'm going.
And so they have to kind of evaluate things as it goes along.
And for many readers, in the beginning, Covenant is just very obnoxious.
Then later they learn to kind of understand him a bit.
I guess to me, one of the paradoxes, I guess it's a paradox, all six volumes is based upon is the idea that
Covenant's power, his ability to combat despite Lord Fowler, is simply the fact that he is a leper
and does have such a lousy life in the real world.
That gives him a strength.
Yeah, it gives him an emotional strength.
What passes for magic in the Covenant books really is just an external expression of personality.
The strength for magic always comes from inside the individual in this kind of world.
And what creates emotional strength is what makes magic like Lord Morum
who in the first Chronicles becomes the strongest of the Lords,
really and does something that nobody else has been able to do in the end
when he kills the giant raver that's attacking them.
What's really an issue for there is emotional strength.
It's not that you know more than somebody else does.
You know more spells than somebody else does.
Or you've studied a different book of Arcana and have learned different kinds of magic or anything else.
In this kind of world magic doesn't hinge on that sort of thing.
It hinges on the strengths and weaknesses of your own personality.
And that's where the danger comes from of course because people who have that susceptibility to pressure
to where like Kevin they crack when things get too bad, then they fall into despair
and you get the same people who perform the ritual of desecration.
The key issue is the personality of the person who has the power
or their personality structure.
You know how strong or how weak they are.
And what Covenant becomes over the course of these six books
is this incredibly strong personality.
And eventually he becomes such a strong personality that in certain ways he doesn't need magic anymore.
You'll find this when you've read through to the end of White Goldwilder
that he dominates situations without using magic anymore
because he has become such a strong structure internally, emotionally.
I imagine one of the joys of being a fantasy writer is in naming things.
And I've always been impressed with the way you pick names for things.
And I wondered if that was something that comes naturally to you or you work at it?
Well I'm always a little embarrassed because traditionally,
I mean if you assume that tradition is Tolkien, then there's really a background for names.
Certainly in Tolkien there is he involved an entire language of Elvish
and worked out immensely elaborate structures which back up the names.
And I have never been able to do that.
As a matter of fact I have trouble with foreign languages of any kind
and became that close to flunking college German and stuff.
I do it by ear. It's a very much an intuitive kind of process for me.
Now there are situations in which I beg, borrow or steal words
that mean something that I use for names.
Like for example all the names of the ravers
are words that have meaning.
And I use those words because they mean something
but also because those words have the right sound to my ear for what I want.
So in those situations the name has to meet two criteria
and the meaning has to be appropriate and it still has to sound right.
Other than that I do it by sound.
Certain kinds of combinations of sounds and whatnot sound good and strong and positive to me
and they sound like good guys and other combinations of sounds sound like bad guys.
You know I make it up.
Now I try to make it up consistently obviously.
Now for the example all the giants have names which are combinations of normal words.
Salt, heart, foam, follower.
You know those are all English words and you just string them together.
So obviously when I'm making up names for my characters
I'm not going to make up that kind of name for one giant
and then make up a completely different, nonsense syllable kind of name for another giant.
All the giants have the same kind of names.
As it happens the ramen, the people in the first trilogy who work with the horses
they all have names based on Indian words that I knew when I was a kid growing up in India.
I just needed some sort of principle to help me pull it together
so that I'm sure I'd be consistent about that name.
So all those people have names that are based on Indian words.
The blood guard and the Hiruchai all have names of a certain.
Sometimes they have two syllables more often than not their one syllable words.
You know brin, kale, kire, you know and they're all words that seem to me to be...
They're full of consonants. They're fairly strong sounding.
But they're not words that would carry any direct meaning in English.
So I follow patterns but I am doing it by ear.
I would imagine too that the name Covenant has meaning doesn't it?
Oh well of course. I'm a religious background and everything else.
You can't use a word like that around me without it carrying all kinds of connotations.
One of which in the religious tradition is simply the
the whole question of the difference in God's relationship to man
between the old Covenant and the new Covenant.
The term Covenant is used to refer to a relationship or a deal
between God and man.
One of the things you'll notice in the first trilogy is that Covenant is always trying to make deals with the land.
You know, I'll do this if you'll do that or if you don't ask me to do this
I won't ask you to do that sort of thing.
Every deal that he makes is seduces him a step further
but they always fail because he's using them as substitutes for real commitment.
In a biblical tradition the first Covenant, the old Covenant, was the Covenant of Law
in which God gives you a bunch of rules to live by and if you live by those rules
you're going to go to heaven and everybody will be happy.
As opposed to the new Covenant, the Christ Covenant, which is the Covenant of Grace
where essentially says, you know, okay, we found out you can't live by the rules after all
but I still want to give you some way to get to heaven.
So we'll have this sacrificial kind of act and you know, I'll send my son to die for your sins
and you can be forgiven for not living according to the rules.
And that brings up the question of law in relation to man and what law can mean.
And of course, particularly in the first trilogy, law is a very important concept for the lords.
They mean something different than a set of rules.
But in a way it is a set of rules.
For them, law is the way nature works and you have to live your life in service to the way nature works
and in harmony with the way nature works and if you become a corruptive or destructive influence
then you're going against law.
So, I mean, the thematic implications run in all kinds of directions.
The same thing is true, of course, for the name Thomas.
Thomas was the disciple of Christ who doubted Christ's resurrection,
who doubted the fundamental religious idea on which 2000 years of Christian history was going to be built.
Well, covenant, Thomas covenant, my character, is a doubter of a certain kind of sin.
He takes the really key point and rejects it for a while.
And that allows me to imply various sorts of religious implications which I like working with.
Throughout all the books you have references, of course, to this long background.
People like Barry Caffé and Kevin Landwaster and the ritual of desecration.
Things that occurred well in the past.
Is this a scheme that you worked out so you're like in the manner of Tolkien, a whole scheme,
and you're just telling one little portion of it?
Not in the manner of Tolkien.
Tolkien really did work out a grand scheme and a lot of it he worked out before he ever decided to write Lord of the Rings.
Or the Hobbit.
This was his hobby, in a sense, was evolving this history of the elves in the world.
Of which Middle-Earth is only a small part.
And eventually he got attracted to the idea of taking a small portion of this entire world history
and trying to write it down for other people to read to see if they would enjoy it.
Not so for me.
I started with the climax of the power that preserves.
And I evolved everything else to try to aim toward that end.
So for me, people like Kevin and Barak and everything else were things that I made up to say.
I set up the issues that I wanted to focus in on in the power that preserves.
This is one reason that I can't write spin-off stories or secondary tales.
You'll never hear a short story from me about what some giant did over somewhere else
or the adventures of so and so hidden over here.
My brain doesn't work that way.
I only made this stuff up because it goes to that focal point that I'm aiming at,
the climax of the power that preserves.
And the stuff that I made up fits that.
It serves the purpose for which I intended it.
But in my mind, it doesn't have a life of its own.
The way Tolkien's whole history background had a life of its own.
And so I just, I mean, they'll never be the Donaldson equivalent of a Silmarillion.
Because I haven't created any of that kind of material and I'm not likely to.
I imagine a lot of your readers, as I did, probably responded to the giants very positively.
Excuse me.
That's okay, we edit those out.
Good.
I guess how do I want to phrase this?
Where did you get the giants from?
I mean, in mythology and in legend, usually bad guys.
Well, I knew that.
So when I was originally planning the story, I wanted to reverse that and to have giants
who are good guys.
But that was as far as it went.
In any creative project of this size, there are some things that you can track down and explain very clearly.
And that there's other things that seem to happen by serendipity.
There's an element of discovery.
In any creative act, you discover your own material.
And that's balanced off by lots of other kinds of things that you do.
I knew that I needed characters in the story.
They were going to be, I was going to call them giants.
They were going to do this and that.
I knew what their function was going to be in the story.
I knew what was going to happen.
I knew names for them.
But the fact is that when I started writing Lord of the Files,
I didn't have any idea what their personality was like.
I just hadn't figured that out.
So my method in writing is very subjective.
Essentially, I start looking at everything through the eyes of my characters
and I just try to see what they see and feel what they're feeling.
It's a self-hypnosis kind of writing where we try to eliminate Steve Donaldson from existence
and I have to page ties right into whatever the ideas are and I just try to write.
Of course, that means I have to do a lot of rewriting later.
But at the time, it's very subjective. It's very experiential.
And me, Covenant and Elena were standing on the banks of the Salzies.
When I first met a giant, this boat was sailing up the river
and I'm just sitting there at the typewriter watching the boat come up the river.
I knew it was going to be a giant on board.
As the author, I had that one advantage over Covenant and Elena.
But I'm just typing along on the thing.
So this is what he looks like and I'm just typing away.
I'm just seeing him come up the river.
It's like he's coming up the river, this being projected on a screen on the edge of the type desk or something.
It was a real discovery for me.
I found out before he started to talk and I think, oh, these are kind of a nice guy.
When I started getting into storytelling and all this, oh boy, I love these giants.
This is great stuff.
I didn't premeditate any of that.
It was a real discovery for me and a very happy discovery.
I had a wonderful time meeting giants for the first time.
And that, of course, shaped the whole context of finding out about their personality,
really cast a lot of light over all the things that they were then going to do in the story.
And there were some things that I had worked out that I was going to have happen in the story,
which at the time seemed purely mechanical.
For example, this question of the destruction of the unhomed in sea reach that takes place in the Ill-Earth War,
where a raver goes and essentially knocks off all the living giants.
Excuse me.
Now, I planned that for purely practical reasons.
I knew that if I were Lord Fowle and I really wanted to march out there with my armies and defeat the lords,
the one thing I could never do would be to leave a party of giants sitting behind me to attack me from the rear,
just when I thought I had the giants where I wanted them.
I mean, the lords where I wanted them.
It's just craziness.
The giants are over here, the lords are over there,
and if I go fight the lords, these giants are just going to come plowing into me,
and I'm never going to be safe.
The only good way to attack the lords is to take care of the giants first.
And I just knew that Fowle was going to do that.
That saves perfectly logical time.
He is going to do something about those giants,
and he's going to make it so that they can't fight.
But that's a very mechanical kind of storytelling decision.
And it is years away.
Actually, from my point of view, I'm still writing Lord Fowle's Bane.
That's coming up in the future.
When I meet Saul Fohmfoller and start to find out what giants I really like,
this suddenly then becomes a very important and also painful part of the story,
because suddenly, you know, I fall in love with this entire race of people,
and I realize I'm down the line, I'm going to have them all killed off.
It becomes emotionally central to the whole story.
It becomes one of the really difficult things that all of the characters have to deal with.
And that discovery of Fohmfoller coming up the river just sheds light and implications
down the whole path of the story into things that I could never have foreseen.
Okay, I nearly answered this, but let me ask anyhow.
You had always intended from the moment you started,
you had this image at the end of the Power of the Preserves ending that you started with.
You had the idea of writing six books.
Two trilogies.
No, well, I started with the ending of the Power of the Preserves.
That's three books.
What happened was that as I was finishing working on the Power of the Preserves,
I became dissatisfied isn't the right word.
I think the first trilogy is perfectly authentic and satisfactory on its own terms.
But I became aware that evil is a much more complicated question than that.
Essentially what happens in the first Chronicles of Thomas Covenant is the Hitler situation.
Hitler comes along, he raises a big army, he wants to conquer the world.
The only thing you can do is to raise a big army yourself and try and stop him.
You know, and it turns out whoever can put out the best muscle in the field is going to be the one who wins.
Now as it happens in the case of Hitler, the good guy's won.
And as it happens in the case of the Chronicles of Thomas Covenant, the good guys win.
But just because you have more muscle doesn't make you the good guy or the bad guy.
It's just muscle.
And at a certain level that's a fairly simple minded kind of thing.
Evil comes in many different guys's and not all of them are that clear or that obvious.
And in a lot of the cases muscle doesn't have anything to do with it.
Muscle isn't going to do us any good when we got Richard Nixon for president.
Because the kind of unscrupulous thing that Richard Nixon is doing is something to which muscle is an inappropriate response.
You know, they just don't connect.
And when Lord Fowler does things other than field armies, muscle is not the answer.
Well I got to thinking about things like that while I was finishing work on the power that preserves.
And got another hot flash for what then became the ending of White Goldwielder.
For what would happen well, if evil doesn't do that, what would it do and how would it work?
And I got this really exciting kind of vision of the climax of the power that preserves.
And then I was back where I was before where I had to plan backward to figure out what the whole situation had been and how it had come about.
Okay, I also know the answer to this because I heard your speeches but I still think it's possible for you to give a brief answer.
One of the people that asked you a question, I forget which section it was, that at the end of the first trilogy you give us hope, the good guys win.
Here we have the second one and all of a sudden that's not fair, you know, evil's still there, we didn't win after all.
At the end of the first trilogy you give us hope but then you start all over again and take it away from us.
Why?
Well for one thing, if evil has been defeated, you know, what you're going to do for a second trilogy.
I mean from a perfectly practical point of view, some of these things are necessary.
But, you know, there are lots of different answers and one of them is just a matter of perspective.
This whole time differential thing that occurs between Covenant's world and the land, much, much, much, much more time is passing in the land than is passing in Covenant's life.
And for the land it's been three and a half thousand years.
Now how big of victory does it have to be?
The fact is that nothing in life is absolutely permanent.
And Covenant's previous victory provided two thousand years of peace and happiness.
You know, we can't get fifteen years out of World War II.
You know, we go through all of that and by, you know, oh, six years later we're in Korea and, you know, what, twelve years after that we're in Vietnam.
You know, for us, when we win in the real world, when we win a victory, you know, it lasts for minutes.
Covenant's victory lasted a long time.
It is just not reasonable that that would last forever.
In addition to that, I tried to make it clear in the first trilogy that Covenant was not killing Lord Fowle.
You can't kill despite, because in the final analysis, despite is part of what it means to be human and you can't exterminate your own personality.
What he does is masters it, in a sense, in the first trilogy.
Defuses it for a while and, you know, like taking the venom out of snake fangs or something like that.
Life becomes safe for a while, but it's just as sure as death and taxes.
You know, this stuff is going to go back and it seems perfectly reasonable.
Of course, from a reader's point of view, you know, Covenant, it's ten years.
For a reader's point of view, it may very well have been five minutes since they finished reading The Power That Preserves.
They pick up the wounded land and they find everything's going to hell in a handbasket.
Essentially, what I've done is I've nuked the land.
You know, so I can understand that for a reader, this can be a real shock.
You have this victory at the end of The Power That Preserves and it's not, in some ways, it's not a very dramatic victory.
Now, what I mean is that there's not a lot of emotional fanfare attached to the victory.
You know, they don't have tick or tape parades.
You know, they don't spend the way they do in Lord of the Rings.
They don't spend fifty pages explaining what happened to everybody after the victory.
They don't, you know, Covenant doesn't go back to Lord Morim and they don't fall on each other's arms and shake hands
and given a feast and drink a bunch of toasts and all this other kind of stuff.
There's not a lot of validation.
Covenant wins. The land is safe. That's the end of the story.
You know, Covenant wakes up in a hospital bed and smiles and decides it's okay to go on living.
And then you go from there bingo-bango and, you know, from fictional terms it's ten years.
From the reader's point of view it's five minutes and everything's been destroyed.
You know, that's tough and I appreciate the position that puts a reader in.
But you have to realize that from my position, it's a very natural storytelling development.
And without it, there wouldn't be a story for me to tell.
Okay, listen, how are we doing on time? I could talk for hours on this. I don't want to take too much of your time, are we?
Well, that's pretty much up to you. I'll like and go on for another ten or fifteen minutes anyway.
That's what I need if you could.
Okay, thank you.
The choice of white gold, I think it was in the one tree one of the, maybe it was said elsewhere,
one of the characters says that white gold exists only in Covenant's ring, that it's a natural alliance of metals.
Why did you choose that as your...
Well, precisely because it is an alliance of metals. You're never going to find white gold or...
I don't care what world it is. It's an alloy. People make white gold. It doesn't occur.
And that makes it possible for me to hypothesize a world in which that particular technology does not exist.
There's no gold at all in the first trilogy, but you do find in the second, if you travel around the world,
that there are other cultures with different attitudes who have discovered gold, yellow gold.
The Kemper in Brotharilmo uses gold as a magical thing.
So the metals do physically exist on the planet, but it is a particular kind of alloy and that makes it...
I can then plausibly claim that this alloy does not exist in that world.
Now, that's from a pragmatic point of view. From a thematic point of view, it's really important that we're talking about something here
that is a combination of materials. The wedding ring that Covenant carries is, like himself, a paradox of a certain sense,
or symbolically a paradox. It is made out of disparate materials.
It is one kind of metal and another kind of metal fused together,
and that is what Covenant does essentially in the course of the story, is that he learns to fuse the disparate sides of his dilemma,
what they call the impossibility of believing the land true and the impossibility of believing it false,
and he finds a way to make those into one thing.
And it is out of those kinds of paradoxes that his strength comes, and so, of course, a ring that is an alloy is symbolically apt for those sorts of issues.
Okay, I think I've read this correctly, but I would like to ask you about it.
Of course, the staff of law is one of the more important... what device is motifs?
You have it destroyed in the first trilogy.
At the end of the second trilogy, it's reforged in a sense.
You have the appointed, is that the Elohim?
Yeah.
And Vane, okay. Did I read this correctly in that the appointer, the Elohim, they're sort of the matter of the earth, the essence of it.
Vane is the structure.
Well, energy and structure.
Energy and structure.
Yeah, that's the simple way to put it.
Any principle of power, I think, has to have energy and structure.
William Blake used to talk about this.
Reason is the circumference of energy.
And if you don't have both reason and energy, you don't have anything at all, because if reason doesn't restrict energy, then it just floats away and you don't have any energy.
And if energy doesn't press against reason, then, you know, it's like a balloon. There's nothing happening. Reason is lying there dead.
And I think it seems natural to me that it would be that way in any situation.
You need structure or rules, balance, order, and you need energy which is contained within that in order for there to be any effectiveness.
And this is, of course, is perfectly consistent with the whole concept of law that's posited throughout the first and second trilogies.
In this particular case, there is one other element that goes into remaking a staff of law, and that is the element of intention which Lyndon Avery provides.
She provides the sense of purpose for the melding, but without, you know, the perfect structure which the Urviles created when they made vain.
And without this, you know, this totally unstructured kind of energy which the Elohim represent, you know, it wouldn't be possible to remake the staff of law.
And after all, this is not just an ordinary tool of magic we're talking about here.
It's explained over and over again throughout the series that the staff of law by its very nature supports and defends the natural order.
And it's very hard to use the power that the staff represents to do anything which violates the natural order or natural law.
And when the staff is broken, that inherently weakens the entire natural order.
It's more than just a magical tool here.
It's an expression of a certain aspect of the existence of this world.
And to make something like that again, you know, requires an extraordinary combination of potentialities and purposes.
Is that second staff going to be stronger than the first?
Well, I think it's going to be different in some ways.
I wouldn't want to say stronger or something.
But in the back of my mind, for example, I think of it as a living staff rather than as a piece of wood which is being used.
Because after all, vein and fendale both went in to make that.
And it would not... I mean, I don't know everything that's going to happen in the future.
I haven't tried to figure it out, but it would not surprise me to find that this staff had a mind of its own.
If it comes back in future stories and that there are various ways in which dealing with it is very different than with the old staff.
Okay, I know when you go to conventions and you talk to fans and they ask about your books and so forth.
I'm sure they ask you about your style and your use of your vocabulary, your large vocabulary and so forth.
I heard you say this yesterday, but I have sensed this myself even before I heard you say it.
You must have fun with your choice of words.
Yeah, fun not in any...
I'm sure there are people who think that I have fun in the sense of,
boy, I'm going to fool people with this word.
Ha ha ha, those stupid readers. They'll never know what I'm talking about now.
That's not it at all. I really am not trying to confuse the issue by the vocabulary that I use.
It is intended to communicate and generally I find that the readers who do the work to figure out what these words mean,
find that it does communicate, that it says what I mean.
And there are plenty of circumstances where I can justify that even though the word is unfamiliar or maybe even unknown to people,
it's actually more precise than the other choices that I have.
But the thing that gets me involved in that in the first place is that just words themselves seem to me to be a happy thing.
I love words. I get a great sense of pleasure out of discovering a word that I didn't know before
and finding out what it means and finding out how it can be used.
You know, that cheers me up.
And there are lots of ways in which I think that if my readers could just hear those words in the spirit in which I put them in the prose,
they would find, for example, that the Covenant books aren't as grim in mood as they think they are
because I'm shooting out these little gleams of pleasure all the time.
And I wish those could be received in the way they were meant because then people would...
Well, like real Musgrave, you were at the panel yesterday, real is an interesting man.
And there are times when he just laughs and chuckles and grins reading things in my books which are grim and he knows that they're grim.
It's not like he's stupid or insensitive, but he's also picking up some of the other things that I'm trying to project as well.
There is an element of joy in those books which balances a lot of the dismay.
And from my point of view, unfortunately, it's conveyed in...it's like being conveyed in code.
It's conveyed through my love of language and not everybody on the other end receives that message that I'm trying to put out.